DECLARE WAR ON YOUR ENEMIES
THE POLARITY STRATEGY
Life is endless battle and conflict, and you cannot fight effectively unless
you can identify your enemies. People are subtle and evasive, disguising
their intentions, pretending to be on your side. You need clarity. Learn to
smoke out your enemies, to spot them by the signs and patterns that reveal
hostility. Then, once you have them in your sights, inwardly declare war.
As the opposite poles of a magnet create motion, your enemies--your
opposites--can fill you with purpose and direction. As people who stand in
your way, who represent what you loathe, people to react against, they are
a source of energy. Do not be naive: with some enemies there can be no
compromise, no middle ground.
Then [Xenophon] got up, and first called together the under-officers of
Proxenos. When they were collected he said: "Gentlemen, I cannot sleep
and I don't think you can; and I can't lie here when I see what a plight
we are in. It is clear that the enemy did not show us open war until they
thought they had everything well prepared; and no-one among us takes
the pains to make the best possible resistance. "Yet if we give way, and
fall into the king's power, what do we expect our fate will be? When his
own half-brother was dead, the man cut off his head and cut off his hand
and stuck them up on a pole. We have no-one to plead for us, and we
marched here to make the king a slave or to kill him if we could, and
what do you think our fate will be? Would he not go to all extremes of
torture to make the whole world afraid of making war on him? Why, we
must do anything to keep out of his power! While the truce lasted, I
never ceased pitying ourselves, I never ceased congratulating the king
and his army. What a vast country I saw, how large, what endless
provisions, what crowds of servants, how many cattle and sheep, what
gold, what raiment! But when I thought of these our soldiers--we had no
share in all these good things unless we bought them, and few had
anything left to buy with; and to procure anything without buying was
debarred by our oaths. While I reasoned like this, I sometimes feared
the truce more than the war now. "However, now they have broken the
truce, there is an end both to their insolence and to our suspicion. There
lie all these good things before us, prizes for whichever side prove the
better men; the gods are the judges of the contest, and they will be with
us, naturally.... "When you have appointed as many commanders as are
wanted, assemble all the other soldiers and encourage them; that will
be just what they want now. Perhaps you have noticed yourselves how
crestfallen they were when they came into camp, how crestfallen they
went on guard; in such a state I don't know what you could do with
them.... But if someone could turn their minds from wondering what will
happen to them, and make them wonder what they could do, they will be
much more cheerful. You know, I am sure, that not numbers or strength
brings victory in war; but whichever army goes into battle stronger in
soul, their enemies generally cannot withstand them."
ANABASIS: THE MARCH UP COUNTRY, XENOPHON, 430?-355? B.C.
THE INNER ENEMY
In the spring of 401 B.C., Xenophon, a thirty-year-old country gentleman
who lived outside Athens, received an intriguing invitation: a friend was
recruiting Greek soldiers to fight as mercenaries for Cyrus, brother of the
Persian king Ataxerxes, and asked him to go along. The request was
somewhat unusual: the Greeks and the Persians had long been bitter
enemies. Some eighty years earlier, in fact, Persia had tried to conquer
Greece. But the Greeks, renowned fighters, had begun to offer their
services to the highest bidder, and within the Persian Empire there were
rebellious cities that Cyrus wanted to punish. Greek mercenaries would be
the perfect reinforcements in his large army.
Xenophon was not a soldier. In fact, he had led a coddled life, raising
dogs and horses, traveling into Athens to talk philosophy with his good
friend Socrates, living off his inheritance. He wanted adventure, though,
and here he had a chance to meet the great Cyrus, learn war, see Persia.
Perhaps when it was all over, he would write a book. He would go not as a
mercenary (he was too wealthy for that) but as a philosopher and historian.
After consulting the oracle at Delphi, he accepted the invitation.
Some 10,000 Greek soldiers joined Cyrus's punitive expedition. The
mercenaries were a motley crew from all over Greece, there for the money
and the adventure. They had a good time of it for a while, but a few months
into the job, after leading them deep into Persia, Cyrus admitted his true
purpose: he was marching on Babylon, mounting a civil war to unseat his
brother and make himself king. Unhappy to be deceived, the Greeks argued
and complained, but Cyrus offered them more money, and that quieted
them.
The armies of Cyrus and Ataxerxes met on the plains of Cunaxa, not far
from Babylon. Early in the battle, Cyrus was killed, putting a quick end to
the war. Now the Greeks' position was suddenly precarious: having fought
on the wrong side of a civil war, they were far from home and surrounded
by hostile Persians. They were soon told, however, that Ataxerxes had no
quarrel with them. His only desire was that they leave Persia as quickly as
possible. He even sent them an envoy, the Persian commander
Tissaphernes, to provision them and escort them back to Greece. And so,
guided by Tissaphernes and the Persian army, the mercenaries began the
long trek home--some fifteen hundred miles.
A few days into the march, the Greeks had new fears: their supplies
from the Persians were insufficient, and the route that Tissaphernes had
chosen for them was problematic. Could they trust these Persians? They
started to argue among themselves.
The Greek commander Clearchus expressed his soldiers' concerns to
Tissaphernes, who was sympathetic: Clearchus should bring his captains to
a meeting at a neutral site, the Greeks would voice their grievances, and
the two sides would come to an understanding. Clearchus agreed and
appeared the next day with his officers at the appointed time and place--
where, however, a large contingent of Persians surrounded and arrested
them. They were beheaded that same day.
One man managed to escape and warn the Greeks of the Persian
treachery. That evening the Greek camp was a desolate place. Some men
argued and accused; others slumped drunk to the ground. A few considered
flight, but with their leaders dead, they felt doomed.
That night Xenophon, who had stayed mostly on the sidelines during
the expedition, had a dream: a lightning bolt from Zeus set fire to his
father's house. He woke up in a sweat. It suddenly struck him: death was
staring the Greeks in the face, yet they lay around moaning, despairing,
arguing. The problem was in their heads. Fighting for money rather than
for a purpose or cause, unable to distinguish between friend and foe, they
had gotten lost. The barrier between them and home was not rivers or
mountains or the Persian army but their own muddled state of mind.
Xenophon didn't want to die in this disgraceful way. He was no military
man, but he knew philosophy and the way men think, and he believed that
if the Greeks concentrated on the enemies who wanted to kill them, they
would become alert and creative. If they focused on the vile treachery of
the Persians, they would grow angry, and their anger would motivate them.
They had to stop being confused mercenaries and go back to being Greeks,
the polar opposite of the faithless Persians. What they needed was clarity
and direction.
Xenophon decided to be Zeus's lightning bolt, waking the men up and
illuminating their way. He called a meeting of all the surviving officers
and stated his plan: We will declare war without parley on the Persians--no
more thoughts of bargaining or debate. We will waste no more time on
argument or accusation among ourselves; every ounce of our energy will
be spent on the Persians. We will be as inventive and inspired as our
ancestors at Marathon, who fought off a vastly larger Persian army. We
will burn our wagons, live off the land, move fast. We will not for one
second lay down our arms or forget the dangers around us. It is us or them,
life or death, good or evil. Should any man try to confuse us with clever
talk or with vague ideas of appeasement, we will declare him too stupid
and cowardly to be on our side and we will drive him away. Let the
Persians make us merciless. We must be consumed with one idea: getting
home alive.
The officers knew that Xenophon was right. The next day a Persian
officer came to see them, offering to act as an ambassador between them
and Ataxerxes; following Xenophon's counsel, he was quickly and rudely
driven away. It was now war and nothing else.
Roused to action, the Greeks elected leaders, Xenophon among them,
and began the march home. Forced to depend on their wits, they quickly
learned to adapt to the terrain, to avoid battle, to move at night. They
successfully eluded the Persians, beating them to a key mountain pass and
moving through it before they could be caught. Although many enemy
tribes still lay between them and Greece, the dreaded Persian army was
now behind them. It took several years, but almost all of them returned to
Greece alive.
Political thought and political instinct prove themselves theoretically
and practically in the ability to distinguish friend and enemy. The high
points of politics are simultaneously the moments in which the enemy is,
in concrete clarity, recognized as the enemy.
CARL SCHMITT, 1888-1985
Interpretation
Life is battle and struggle, and you will constantly find yourself facing bad
situations, destructive relationships, dangerous engagements. How you
confront these difficulties will determine your fate. As Xenophon said,
your obstacles are not rivers or mountains or other people; your obstacle is
yourself. If you feel lost and confused, if you lose your sense of direction,
if you cannot tell the difference between friend and foe, you have only
yourself to blame.
Think of yourself as always about to go into battle. Everything depends
on your frame of mind and on how you look at the world. A shift of
perspective can transform you from a passive and confused mercenary into
a motivated and creative fighter.
We are defined by our relationship to other people. As children we
develop an identity by differentiating ourselves from others, even to the
point of pushing them away, rejecting them, rebelling. The more clearly
you recognize who you do not want to be, then, the clearer your sense of
identity and purpose will be. Without a sense of that polarity, without an
enemy to react against, you are as lost as the Greek mercenaries. Duped by
other people's treachery, you hesitate at the fatal moment and descend into
whining and argument.
Focus on an enemy. It can be someone who blocks your path or
sabotages you, whether subtly or obviously; it can be someone who has
hurt you or someone who has fought you unfairly; it can be a value or an
idea that you loathe and that you see in an individual or group. It can be an
abstraction: stupidity, smugness, vulgar materialism. Do not listen to
people who say that the distinction between friend and enemy is primitive
and passe. They are just disguising their fear of conflict behind a front of
false warmth. They are trying to push you off course, to infect you with the
vagueness that inflicts them. Once you feel clear and motivated, you will
have space for true friendship and true compromise. Your enemy is the
polar star that guides you. Given that direction, you can enter battle.
He that is not with me is against me
--Luke 11:23
THE OUTER ENEMY
In the early 1970s, the British political system had settled into a
comfortable pattern: the Labour Party would win an election, and then, the
next time around, the Conservatives would win. Back and forth the power
went, all fairly genteel and civilized. In fact, the two parties had come to
resemble one another. But when the Conservatives lost in 1974, some of
them had had enough. Wanting to shake things up, they proposed Margaret
Thatcher as their leader. The party was divided that year, and Thatcher
took advantage of the split and won the nomination.
I am by nature warlike. To attack is among my instincts. To be able to
be an enemy, to be an enemy--that presupposes a strong nature, it is in
any event a condition of every strong nature. It needs resistances,
consequently it seeks resistances.... The strength of one who attacks has
in the opposition he needs a kind of gauge; every growth reveals itself
in the seeking out of a powerful opponent--or problem: for a
philosopher who is warlike also challenges problems to a duel. The
undertaking is to master, not any resistances that happen to present
themselves, but those against which one has to bring all one's strength,
suppleness and mastery of weapons--to master equal opponents.
FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE, 1844-1900
No one had ever seen a politician quite like Thatcher. A woman in a
world run by men, she was also proudly middle class--the daughter of a
grocer--in the traditional party of the aristocracy. Her clothes were prim,
more like a housewife's than a politician's. She had not been a player in the
Conservative Party; in fact, she was on its right-wing fringes. Most striking
of all was her style: where other politicians were smooth and conciliatory,
she confronted her opponents, attacking them directly. She had an appetite
for battle.
Most politicians saw Thatcher's election as a fluke and didn't expect
her to last. And in her first few years leading the party, when Labour was in
power, she did little to change their opinion. She railed against the socialist
system, which in her mind had choked all initiative and was largely
responsible for the decline of the British economy. She criticized the
Soviet Union at a time of detente. Then, in the winter of 1978-79, several
public-sector unions decided to strike. Thatcher went on the warpath,
linking the strikes to the Labour Party and Prime Minister James
Callaghan. This was bold, divisive talk, good for making the evening news--but not for winning elections. You had to be gentle with the voters,
reassure them, not frighten them. At least that was the conventional
wisdom.
In 1979 the Labour Party called a general election. Thatcher kept on the
attack, categorizing the election as a crusade against socialism and as
Great Britain's last chance to modernize. Callaghan was the epitome of the
genteel politician, but Thatcher got under his skin. He had nothing but
disdain for this housewife-turned-politician, and he returned her fire: he
agreed that the election was a watershed, for if Thatcher won, she would
send the economy into shock. The strategy seemed partly to work;
Thatcher scared many voters, and the polls that tracked personal popularity
showed that her numbers had fallen well below Callaghan's. At the same
time, though, her rhetoric, and Callaghan's response to it, polarized the
electorate, which could finally see a sharp difference between the parties.
Dividing the public into left and right, she charged into the breach, sucking
in attention and attracting the undecided. She won a sizable victory.
Thatcher had bowled over the voters, but now, as prime minister, she
would have to moderate her tone, heal the wounds--according to the polls,
at any rate, that was what the public wanted. But Thatcher as usual did the
opposite, enacting budget cuts that went even deeper than she had proposed
during the campaign. As her policies played out, the economy did indeed
go into shock, as Callaghan had said it would, and unemployment soared.
Men in her own party, many of whom had by that point been resenting her
treatment of them for years, began publicly to question her abilities. These
men, whom she called the "wets," were the most respected members of the
Conservative Party, and they were in a panic: she was leading the country
into an economic disaster that they were afraid they would pay for with
their careers. Thatcher's response was to purge them from her cabinet. She
seemed bent on pushing everyone away; her legion of enemies was
growing, her poll numbers slipping still lower. Surely the next election
would be her last.
[Salvador Dali] had no time for those who did not agree with his
principles, and took the war into the enemy camp by writing insulting
letters to many of the friends he had made in the Residencia, calling
them pigs. He happily compared himself to a clever bull avoiding the
cowboys and generally had a great deal of fun stirring up and
scandalizing almost every Catalan intellectual worthy of the name. Dali
was beginning to burn his bridges with the zeal of an arsonist.... "We
[Dali and the filmmaker Luis Bunuel] had resolved to send a poison pen
letter to one of the great celebrities of Spain," Dali later told his
biographer Alain Bosquet. "Our goal was pure subversion.... Both of us
were strongly influenced by Nietzsche.... We hit upon two names:
Manuel de Falla, the composer, and Juan Ramon Jimenez, the poet. We
drew straws and Jimenez won.... So we composed a frenzied and nasty
letter of incomparable violence and addressed it to Juan Ramon
Jimenez. It read: 'Our Distinguished Friend: We believe it is our duty to
inform you--disinterestedly--that your work is deeply repugnant to us
because of its immorality, its hysteria, its arbitrary quality....' It caused
Jimenez great pain...."
THE PERSISTENCE OF MEMORY: A BIOGRAPHY OF DALI,
MEREDITH ETHERINGTON-SMITH, 1992
Then, in 1982, on the other side of the Atlantic, the military junta that
ruled Argentina, needing a cause to distract the country from its many
problems, invaded the Falkland Islands, a British possession to which,
however, Argentina had a historical claim. The officers of the junta felt
certain that the British would abandon these islands, barren and remote.
But Thatcher did not hesitate: despite the distance--eight thousand miles--
she sent a naval task force to the Falklands. Labour leaders attacked her for
this pointless and costly war. Many in her own party were terrified; if the
attempt to retake the islands failed, the party would be ruined. Thatcher
was more alone than ever. But much of the public now saw her qualities,
which had seemed so irritating, in a new light: her obstinacy became
courage, nobility. Compared to the dithering, pantywaisted, careerist men
around her, Thatcher seemed resolute and confident.
The British successfully won back the Falklands, and Thatcher stood
taller than ever. Suddenly the country's economic and social problems were
forgotten. Thatcher now dominated the scene, and in the next two elections
she crushed Labour 
Interpretation
Margaret Thatcher came to power as an outsider: a middle-class woman, a
right-wing radical. The first instinct of most outsiders who attain power is
to become insiders--life on the outside is hard--but in doing so they lose
their identity, their difference, the thing that makes them stand out in the
public eye. If Thatcher had become like the men around her, she would
simply have been replaced by yet another man. Her instinct was to stay an
outsider. In fact, she pushed being an outsider as far as it could go: she set
herself up as one woman against an army of men.
At every step of the way, to give her the contrast she needed, Thatcher
marked out an opponent: the socialists, the wets, the Argentineans. These
enemies helped to define her image as determined, powerful, self
sacrificing. Thatcher was not seduced by popularity, which is ephemeral
and superficial. Pundits might obsess over popularity numbers, but in the
mind of the voter--which, for a politician, is the field of battle--a
dominating presence has more pull than does likability. Let some of the
public hate you; you cannot please everyone. Your enemies, those you
stand sharply against, will help you to forge a support base that will not
desert you. Do not crowd into the center, where everyone else is; there is
no room to fight in a crowd. Polarize people, drive some of them away, and
create a space for battle.
Everything in life conspires to push you into the center, and not just
politically. The center is the realm of compromise. Getting along with
other people is an important skill to have, but it comes with a danger: by
always seeking the path of least resistance, the path of conciliation, you
forget who you are, and you sink into the center with everyone else. Instead
see yourself as a fighter, an outsider surrounded by enemies. Constant
battle will keep you strong and alert. It will help to define what you believe
in, both for yourself and for others. Do not worry about antagonizing
people; without antagonism there is no battle, and without battle, there is
no chance of victory. Do not be lured by the need to be liked: better to be
respected, even feared. Victory over your enemies will bring you a more
lasting popularity.
The opposition of a member to an associate is no purely negative social
factor, if only because such opposition is often the only means for
making life with actually unbearable people at least possible. If we did
not even have the power and the right to rebel against tyranny,
arbitrariness, moodiness, tactlessness, we could not bear to have any
relation to people from whose characters we thus suffer. We would feel
pushed to take desperate steps--and these, indeed, would end the
relation but do not, perhaps, constitute "conflict." Not only because of
the fact that...oppression usually increases if it is suffered calmly and
without protest, but also because opposition gives us inner satisfaction,
distraction, relief...Our opposition makes us feel that we are not
completely victims of the circumstances.
GEORG SIMMEL, 1858-1918
Don't depend on the enemy not coming; depend rather on being ready
for him.--Sun-tzu, The Art of War (fourth century B.C.)
KEYS TO WARFARE
We live in an era in which people are seldom directly hostile. The rules of
engagement--social, political, military--have changed, and so must your
notion of the enemy. An up-front enemy is rare now and is actually a
blessing. People hardly ever attack you openly anymore, showing their
intentions, their desire to destroy you; instead they are political and
indirect. Although the world is more competitive than ever, outward
aggression is discouraged, so people have learned to go underground, to
attack unpredictably and craftily. Many use friendship as a way to mask
aggressive desires: they come close to you to do more harm. (A friend
knows best how to hurt you.) Or, without actually being friends, they offer
assistance and alliance: they may seem supportive, but in the end they're
advancing their own interests at your expense. Then there are those who
master moral warfare, playing the victim, making you feel guilty for
something unspecified you've done. The battlefield is full of these
warriors, slippery, evasive, and clever.
Understand: the word "enemy"--from the Latin inimicus, "not a friend"--has been demonized and politicized. Your first task as a strategist is to
widen your concept of the enemy, to include in that group those who are
working against you, thwarting you, even in subtle ways. (Sometimes
indifference and neglect are better weapons than aggression, because you
can't see the hostility they hide.) Without getting paranoid, you need to
realize that there are people who wish you ill and operate indirectly.
Identify them and you'll suddenly have room to maneuver. You can stand
back and wait and see or you can take action, whether aggressive or just
evasive, to avoid the worst. You can even work to turn this enemy into a
friend. But whatever you do, do not be the naive victim. Do not find
yourself constantly retreating, reacting to your enemies' maneuvers. Arm
yourself with prudence, and never completely lay down your arms, not
even for friends.
As one travels up any one of the large rivers [of Borneo], one meets with
tribes that are successively more warlike. In the coast regions are
peaceful communities which never fight save in self-defense, and then
with but poor success, whereas in the central regions, where the rivers
take their rise, are a number of extremely warlike tribes whose raids
have been a constant source of terror to the communities settled in the
lower reaches of the rivers.... It might be supposed that the peaceful
coast people would be found to be superior in moral qualities to their
more warlike neighbors, but the contrary is the case. In almost all
respects the advantage lies with the warlike tribes. Their houses are
better built, larger, and cleaner; their domestic morality is superior;
they are physically stronger, are braver, and physically and mentally
more active and in general are more trustworthy. But, above all, their
social organization is firmer and more efficient because their respect
for and obedience to their chiefs and their loyalty to their community
are much greater; each man identifies himself with the whole
community and accepts and loyally performs the social duties laid upon
him.
WILLIAM MCDOUGALL, 1871-1938
People are usually good at hiding their hostility, but often they
unconsciously give off signals showing that all is not what it seems. One of
the closest friends and advisers of the Chinese Communist Party leader
Mao Tse-tung was Lin Biao, a high-ranking member of the Politburo and
possible successor to the chairman. In the late 1960s and early '70s,
though, Mao detected a change in Lin: he had become effusively friendly.
Everyone praised Mao, but Lin's praise was embarrassingly fervent. To
Mao this meant that something was wrong. He watched Lin closely and decided that the man was plotting a takeover, or at the very least
positioning himself for the top spot. And Mao was right: Lin was plotting
busily. The point is not to mistrust all friendly gestures but to notice them. Register any change in the emotional temperature: unusual chumminess, a
new desire to exchange confidences, excessive praise of you to third
parties, the desire for an alliance that may make more sense for the other
person than for you. Trust your instincts: if someone's behavior seems
suspicious, it probably is. It may turn out to be benign, but in the meantime
it is best to be on your guard.
You can sit back and read the signs or you can actively work to uncover
your enemies--beat the grass to startle the snakes, as the Chinese say. In
the Bible we read of David's suspicion that his father-in-law, King Saul,
secretly wanted him dead. How could David find out? He confided his
suspicion to Saul's son Jonathan, his close friend. Jonathan refused to
believe it, so David suggested a test. He was expected at court for a feast.
He would not go; Jonathan would attend and pass along David's excuse,
which would be adequate but not urgent. Sure enough, the excuse enraged
Saul, who exclaimed, "Send at once and fetch him unto me--he deserves to
die!"
David's test succeeded because it was ambiguous. His excuse for
missing the feast could be read in more than one way: if Saul meant well
toward David, he would have seen his son-in-law's absence as no more than
selfish at worst, but because he secretly hated David, he saw it as
effrontery, and it pushed him over the edge. Follow David's example: say
or do something that can be read in more than one way, that may be
superficially polite but that could also indicate a slight coolness on your
part or be seen as a subtle insult. A friend may wonder but will let it pass.
The secret enemy, though, will react with anger. Any strong emotion and
you will know that there's something boiling under the surface.
Often the best way to get people to reveal themselves is to provoke
tension and argument. The Hollywood producer Harry Cohn, president of
Universal Pictures, frequently used this strategy to ferret out the real
position of people in the studio who refused to show what side they were
on: he would suddenly attack their work or take an extreme position, even
an offensive one, in an argument. His provoked directors and writers would
drop their usual caution and show their real beliefs.
Understand: people tend to be vague and slippery because it is safer
than outwardly committing to something. If you are the boss, they will
mimic your ideas. Their agreement is often pure courtiership. Get them
emotional; people are usually more sincere when they argue. If you pick an
argument with someone and he keeps on mimicking your ideas, you may
be dealing with a chameleon, a particularly dangerous type. Beware of
people who hide behind a facade of vague abstractions and impartiality: no
one is impartial. A sharply worded question, an opinion designed to offend,
will make them react and take sides.
Man exists only in so far as he is opposed.
GEORG HEGEL, 1770-1831
Sometimes it is better to take a less direct approach with your potential
enemies--to be as subtle and conniving as they are. In 1519, Hernan Cortes
arrived in Mexico with his band of adventurers. Among these five hundred
men were some whose loyalty was dubious. Throughout the expedition,
whenever any of Cortes's soldiers did something he saw as suspicious, he
never got angry or accusatory. Instead he pretended to go along with them,
accepting and approving what they had done. Thinking Cortes weak, or
thinking he was on their side, they would take another step. Now he had
what he wanted: a clear sign, to himself and others, that they were traitors.
Now he could isolate and destroy them. Adopt the method of Cortes: if
friends or followers whom you suspect of ulterior motives suggest
something subtly hostile, or against your interests, or simply odd, avoid the
temptation to react, to say no, to get angry, or even to ask questions. Go
along, or seem to turn a blind eye: your enemies will soon go further,
showing more of their hand. Now you have them in sight, and you can
attack.
An enemy is often large and hard to pinpoint--an organization, or a
person hidden behind some complicated network. What you want to do is
take aim at one part of the group--a leader, a spokesman, a key member of
the inner circle. That is how the activist Saul Alinsky tackled corporations
and bureaucracies. In his 1960s campaign to desegregate Chicago's public
school system, he focused on the superintendent of schools, knowing full
well that this man would try to shift the blame upward. By taking repeated
hits at the superintendent, he was able to publicize his struggle, and it
became impossible for the man to hide. Eventually those behind him had to
come to his aid, exposing themselves in the process. Like Alinsky, never
aim at a vague, abstract enemy. It is hard to drum up the emotions to fight
such a bloodless battle, which in any case leaves your enemy invisible.
Personalize the fight, eyeball to eyeball.
Danger is everywhere. There are always hostile people and destructive
relationships. The only way to break out of a negative dynamic is to
confront it. Repressing your anger, avoiding the person threatening you,
always looking to conciliate--these common strategies spell ruin.
Avoidance of conflict becomes a habit, and you lose the taste for battle.
Feeling guilty is pointless; it is not your fault you have enemies. Feeling
wronged or victimized is equally futile. In both cases you are looking
inward, concentrating on yourself and your feelings. Instead of
internalizing a bad situation, externalize it and face your enemy. It is the
only way out.
The frequent hearing of my mistress reading the bible--for she often
read aloud when her husband was absent--soon awakened my curiosity
in respect to this mystery of reading, and roused in me the desire to
learn. Having no fear of my kind mistress before my eyes, (she had given
me no reason to fear,) I frankly asked her to teach me to read; and
without hesitation, the dear woman began the task, and very soon, by
her assistance, I was master of the alphabet, and could spell words of
three or four letters...Master Hugh was amazed at the simplicity of his
spouse, and, probably for the first time, he unfolded to her the true
philosophy of slavery, and the peculiar rules necessary to be observed
by masters and mistresses, in the management of their human chattels.
Mr. Auld promptly forbade the continuance of her [reading] instruction;
telling her, in the first place, that the thing itself was unlawful; that it
was also unsafe, and could only lead to mischief.... Mrs. Auld evidently
felt the force of his remarks; and, like an obedient wife, began to shape
her course in the direction indicated by her husband. The effect of his
words, on me, was neither slight nor transitory. His iron sentences--
cold and harsh--sunk deep into my heart, and stirred up not only my
feelings into a sort of rebellion, but awakened within me a slumbering
train of vital thought. It was a new and special revelation, dispelling a
painful mystery, against which my youthful understanding had
struggled, and struggled in vain, to wit: the white man's power to
perpetuate the enslavement of the black man. "Very well," thought I;
"knowledge unfits a child to be a slave." I instinctively assented to the
proposition; and from that moment I understood the direct pathway
from slavery to freedom. This was just what I needed; and got it at a
time, and from a source, whence I least expected it.... Wise as Mr. Auld
was, he evidently underrated my comprehension, and had little idea of
the use to which I was capable of putting the impressive lesson he was
giving to his wife.... That which he most loved I most hated; and the very
determination which he expressed to keep me in ignorance, only
rendered me the more resolute in seeking intelligence.
MY BONDAGE AND MY FREEDOM, FREDERICK DOUGLASS, 1818
1895
The child psychologist Jean Piaget saw conflict as a critical part of
mental development. Through battles with peers and then parents, children
learn to adapt to the world and develop strategies for dealing with
problems. Those children who seek to avoid conflict at all cost, or those
who have overprotective parents, end up handicapped socially and
mentally. The same is true of adults: it is through your battles with others
that you learn what works, what doesn't, and how to protect yourself.
Instead of shrinking from the idea of having enemies, then, embrace it.
Conflict is therapeutic.
Enemies bring many gifts. For one thing, they motivate you and focus
your beliefs. The artist Salvador Dali found early on that there were many
qualities he could not stand in people: conformity, romanticism, piety. At
every stage of his life, he found someone he thought embodied these anti
ideals--an enemy to vent on. First it was the poet Federico Garcia Lorca,
who wrote romantic poetry; then it was Andre Breton, the heavy-handed
leader of the surrealist movement. Having such enemies to rebel against
made Dali feel confident and inspired.
Enemies also give you a standard by which to judge yourself, both
personally and socially. The samurai of Japan had no gauge of their
excellence unless they fought the best swordsmen; it took Joe Frazier to
make Muhammad Ali a truly great fighter. A tough opponent will bring out
the best in you. And the bigger the opponent, the greater your reward, even
in defeat. It is better to lose to a worthy opponent than to squash some
harmless foe. You will gain sympathy and respect, building support for
your next fight.
Being attacked is a sign that you are important enough to be a target.
You should relish the attention and the chance to prove yourself. We all
have aggressive impulses that we are forced to repress; an enemy supplies
you with an outlet for these drives. At last you have someone on whom to
unleash your aggression without feeling guilty.
Leaders have always found it useful to have an enemy at their gates in
times of trouble, distracting the public from their difficulties. In using your
enemies to rally your troops, polarize them as far as possible: they will
fight the more fiercely when they feel a little hatred. So exaggerate the
differences between you and the enemy--draw the lines clearly. Xenophon
made no effort to be fair; he did not say that the Persians weren't really
such a bad lot and had done much to advance civilization. He called them
barbarians, the antithesis of the Greeks. He described their recent treachery
and said they were an evil culture that could find no favor with the gods.
And so it is with you: victory is your goal, not fairness and balance. Use
the rhetoric of war to heighten the stakes and stimulate the spirit.
What you want in warfare is room to maneuver. Tight corners spell
death. Having enemies gives you options. You can play them off against
each other, make one a friend as a way of attacking the other, on and on.
Without enemies you will not know how or where to maneuver, and you
will lose a sense of your limits, of how far you can go. Early on, Julius
Caesar identified Pompey as his enemy. Measuring his actions and
calculating carefully, he did only those things that left him in a solid
position in relation to Pompey. When war finally broke out between the
two men, Caesar was at his best. But once he defeated Pompey and had no
more such rivals, he lost all sense of proportion--in fact, he fancied himself
a god. His defeat of Pompey was his own undoing. Your enemies force on
you a sense of realism and humility.
Remember: there are always people out there who are more aggressive,
more devious, more ruthless than you are, and it is inevitable that some of
them will cross your path. You will have a tendency to want to conciliate
and compromise with them. The reason is that such types are often brilliant
deceivers who see the strategic value in charm or in seeming to allow you
plenty of space, but actually their desires have no limit, and they are
simply trying to disarm you. With some people you have to harden
yourself, to recognize that there is no middle ground, no hope of
conciliation. For your opponent your desire to compromise is a weapon to
use against you. Know these dangerous enemies by their past: look for
quick power grabs, sudden rises in fortune, previous acts of treachery.
Once you suspect you are dealing with a Napoleon, do not lay down your
arms or entrust them to someone else. You are the last line of your own
defense.
Authority: If you count on safety and do not think of danger, if you
do not know enough to be wary when enemies arrive, this is called a
sparrow nesting on a tent, a fish swimming in a cauldron--they
won't last the day.--Chuko Liang (A.D. 181-234 )
REVERSAL
Always keep the search for and use of enemies under control. It is clarity
you want, not paranoia. It is the downfall of many tyrants to see an enemy
in everyone. They lose their grip on reality and become hopelessly
embroiled in the emotions their paranoia churns up. By keeping an eye on
possible enemies, you are simply being prudent and cautious. Keep your
suspicions to yourself, so that if you're wrong, no one will know. Also,
beware of polarizing people so completely that you cannot back off.
Margaret Thatcher, usually brilliant at the polarizing game, eventually lost
control of it: she created too many enemies and kept repeating the same
tactic, even in situations that called for retreat. Franklin Delano Roosevelt
was a master polarizer, always looking to draw a line between himself and
his enemies. Once he had made that line clear enough, though, he backed
off, which made him look like a conciliator, a man of peace who
occasionally went to war. Even if that impression was false, it was the
height of wisdom to create it.
DO NOT FIGHT THE LAST WAR
THE GUERRILLA-WAR-OF-THE-MIND STRATEGY
What most often weighs you down and brings you misery is the past, in the
form of unnecessary attachments, repetitions of tired formulas, and the
memory of old victories and defeats. You must consciously wage war
against the past and force yourself to react to the present moment. Be
ruthless on yourself; do not repeat the same tired methods. Sometimes you
must force yourself to strike out in new directions, even if they involve risk.
What you may lose in comfort and security, you will gain in surprise,
making it harder for your enemies to tell what you will do. Wage guerrilla
war on your mind, allowing no static lines of defense, no exposed citadels--make everything fluid and mobile.
Theory cannot equip the mind with formulas for solving problems, nor
can it mark the narrow path on which the sole solution is supposed to
lie by planting a hedge of principles on either side. But it can give the
mind insight into the great mass of phenomena and of their
relationships, then leave it free to rise into the higher realms of action.
There the mind can use its innate talents to capacity, combining them
all so as to seize on what is right and true as though this were a single
idea formed by their concentrated pressure--as though it were a
response to the immediate challenge rather than a product of thought.
ON WAR, CARL VON CLAUSEWITZ, 1780-1831
THE LAST WAR
No one has risen to power faster than Napoleon Bonaparte (1769-1821). In
1793 he went from captain in the French revolutionary army to brigadier
general. In 1796 he became the leader of the French force in Italy fighting
the Austrians, whom he crushed that year and again three years later. He
became first consul of France in 1801, emperor in 1804. In 1805 he
humiliated the Austrian and Russian armies at the Battle of Austerlitz.
For many, Napoleon was more than a great general; he was a genius, a
god of war. Not everyone was impressed, though: there were Prussian
generals who thought he had merely been lucky. Where Napoleon was rash
and aggressive, they believed, his opponents had been timid and weak. If
he ever faced the Prussians, he would be revealed as a great fake.
Among these Prussian generals was Friedrich Ludwig, prince of
Hohenlohe-Ingelfingen (1746-1818). Hohenlohe came from one of
Germany's oldest aristocratic families, one with an illustrious military
record. He had begun his career young, serving under Frederick the Great
(1712-86) himself, the man who had single-handedly made Prussia a great
power. Hohenlohe had risen through the ranks, becoming a general at fifty--young by Prussian standards.
To Hohenlohe success in war depended on organization, discipline, and
the use of superior strategies developed by trained military minds. The
Prussians exemplified all of these virtues. Prussian soldiers drilled
relentlessly until they could perform elaborate maneuvers as precisely as a
machine. Prussian generals intensely studied the victories of Frederick the
Great; war for them was a mathematical affair, the application of timeless
principles. To the generals Napoleon was a Corsican hothead leading an
unruly citizens' army. Superior in knowledge and skill, they would
outstrategize him. The French would panic and crumble in the face of the
disciplined Prussians; the Napoleonic myth would lie in ruins, and Europe
could return to its old ways.
In August 1806, Hohenlohe and his fellow generals finally got what
they wanted: King Friedrich Wilhelm III of Prussia, tired of Napoleon's
broken promises, decided to declare war on him in six weeks. In the
meantime he asked his generals to come up with a plan to crush the French.
Hohenlohe was ecstatic. This campaign would be the climax of his
career. He had been thinking for years about how to beat Napoleon, and he
presented his plan at the generals' first strategy session: precise marches
would place the army at the perfect angle from which to attack the French
as they advanced through southern Prussia. An attack in oblique formation--Frederick the Great's favorite tactic--would deliver a devastating blow.
The other generals, all in their sixties and seventies, presented their own
plans, but these too were merely variants on the tactics of Frederick the
Great. Discussion turned into argument; several weeks went by. Finally the
king had to step in and create a compromise strategy that would satisfy all
of his generals.
He [Baron Antoine-Henri de Jomini] --often quite arbitrarily--presses
[the deeds of Napoleon] into a system which he foists on Napoleon, and,
in doing so, completely fails to see what, above all, really constitutes
the greatness of this captain--namely, the reckless boldness of his
operations, where, scoffing at all theory, he always tried to do what
suited each occasion best.
FRIEDRICH VON BERNHARDI, 1849-1930
A feeling of exuberance swept the country, which would soon relive the
glory years of Frederick the Great. The generals realized that Napoleon
knew about their plans--he had excellent spies--but the Prussians had a
head start, and once their war machine started to move, nothing could stop
it.
On October 5, a few days before the king was to declare war, disturbing
news reached the generals. A reconnaissance mission revealed that
divisions of Napoleon's army, which they had believed was dispersed, had
marched east, merged, and was massing deep in southern Prussia. The
captain who had led the scouting mission reported that the French soldiers
were marching with packs on their backs: where the Prussians used slow
moving wagons to provision their troops, the French carried their own
supplies and moved with astonishing speed and mobility.
Before the generals had time to adjust their plans, Napoleon's army
suddenly wheeled north, heading straight for Berlin, the heart of Prussia.
The generals argued and dithered, moving their troops here and there,
trying to decide where to attack. A mood of panic set in. Finally the king
ordered a retreat: the troops would reassemble to the north and attack
Napoleon's flank as he advanced toward Berlin. Hohenlohe was in charge
of the rear guard, protecting the Prussians' retreat.
On October 14, near the town of Jena, Napoleon caught up with
Hohenlohe, who finally faced the battle he had wanted so desperately. The
numbers on both sides were equal, but while the French were an unruly
force, fighting pell-mell and on the run, Hohenlohe kept his troops in tight
order, orchestrating them like a corps de ballet. The fighting went back and
forth until finally the French captured the village of Vierzehnheiligen.
Hohenlohe ordered his troops to retake the village. In a ritual dating
back to Frederick the Great, a drum major beat out a cadence and the
Prussian soldiers, their colors flying, re-formed their positions in perfect
parade order, preparing to advance. They were in an open plain, though,
and Napoleon's men were behind garden walls and on the house roofs. The
Prussians fell like ninepins to the French marksmen. Confused, Hohenlohe
ordered his soldiers to halt and change formation. The drums beat again,
the Prussians marched with magnificent precision, always a sight to
behold--but the French kept shooting, decimating the Prussian line.
Never had Hohenlohe seen such an army. The French soldiers were like
demons. Unlike his disciplined soldiers, they moved on their own, yet there
was method to their madness. Suddenly, as if from nowhere, they rushed
forward on both sides, threatening to surround the Prussians. The prince
ordered a retreat. The Battle of Jena was over.
Like a house of cards, the Prussians quickly crumbled, one fortress
falling after another. The king fled east. In a matter of days, virtually
nothing remained of the once mighty Prussian army.
THE BAT AND THE HOUSE-FERRETS
A bat fell to the ground and was caught by a house-ferret. Realizing that
she was on the point of being killed, she begged for her life. The house
ferret said to her that she couldn't let her go, for ferrets were supposed
to be natural enemies to all birds. The bat replied that she herself was
not a bird, but a mouse. She managed to extricate herself from her
danger by this means. Eventually, falling a second time, the bat was
caught by another house-ferret. Again she pleaded to the ferret not to
eat her. The second ferret declared that she absolutely detested all
mice. But the bat positively affirmed that she was not a mouse but a bat.
And so she was released again. And that was how she saved herself from
death twice by a mere change of name. This fable shows that it is not
always necessary to confine ourselves to the same tactics. But, on the
contrary, if we are adaptable to circumstances we can better escape
danger.
FABLES, AESOP, SIXTH CENTURY B.C.
Interpretation
The reality facing the Prussians in 1806 was simple: they had fallen fifty
years behind the times. Their generals were old, and instead of responding
to present circumstances, they were repeating formulas that had worked in
the past. Their army moved slowly, and their soldiers were automatons on
parade. The Prussian generals had many signs to warn them of disaster:
their army had not performed well in its recent engagements, a number of
Prussian officers had preached reform, and, last but not least, they had had
ten years to study Napoleon--his innovative strategies and the speed and
fluidity with which his armies converged on the enemy. Reality was staring
them in the face, yet they chose to ignore it. Indeed, they told themselves
that Napoleon was the one who was doomed.
You might find the Prussian army just an interesting historical
example, but in fact you are likely marching in the same direction yourself.
What limits individuals as well as nations is the inability to confront
reality, to see things for what they are. As we grow older, we become more
rooted in the past. Habit takes over. Something that has worked for us
before becomes a doctrine, a shell to protect us from reality. Repetition
replaces creativity. We rarely realize we're doing this, because it is almost
impossible for us to see it happening in our own minds. Then suddenly a
young Napoleon crosses our path, a person who does not respect tradition,
who fights in a new way. Only then do we see that our ways of thinking and
responding have fallen behind the times.
Never take it for granted that your past successes will continue into the
future. Actually, your past successes are your biggest obstacle: every
battle, every war, is different, and you cannot assume that what worked
before will work today. You must cut yourself loose from the past and
open your eyes to the present. Your tendency to fight the last war may lead
to your final war.
When in 1806 the Prussian generals...plunged into the open jaws of
disaster by using Frederick the Great's oblique order of battle, it was
not just a case of a style that had outlived its usefulness but the most
extreme poverty of the imagination to which routine has ever led. The
result was that the Prussian army under Hohenlohe was ruined more
completely than any army has ever been ruined on the battlefield.--Carl von Clausewitz, ON WAR (1780-1831)
THE PRESENT WAR
In 1605, Miyamoto Musashi, a samurai who had made a name for himself
as a swordsman at the young age of twenty-one, was challenged to a duel.
The challenger, a young man named Matashichiro, came from the
Yoshioka family, a clan itself renowned for swordsmanship. Earlier that
year Musashi had defeated Matashichiro's father, Genzaemon, in a duel.
Days later he had killed Genzaemon's younger brother in another duel. The
Yoshioka family wanted revenge.
I never read any treatises on strategy.... When we fight, we do not take
any books with us.
MAO TSE-TUNG, 1893-1976
Musashi's friends smelled a trap in Matashichiro's challenge and
offered to accompany him to the duel, but Musashi went alone. In his
earlier fights with the Yoshiokas, he had angered them by showing up
hours late; this time, though, he came early and hid in the trees.
Matashichiro arrived with a small army. Musashi would "arrive way
behind schedule as usual," one of them said, "but that trick won't work with
us anymore!" Confident in their ambush, Matashichiro's men lay down and
hid in the grass. Suddenly Musashi leaped out from behind his tree and
shouted, "I've been waiting long enough. Draw your sword!" In one swift
stroke, he killed Matashichiro, then took a position at an angle to the other
men. All of them jumped to their feet, but they were caught off guard and
startled, and instead of surrounding him, they stood in a broken line.
Musashi simply ran down the line, killing the dazed men one after another
in a matter of seconds.
Musashi's victory sealed his reputation as one of Japan's greatest
swordsmen. He now roamed the country looking for suitable challenges. In
one town he heard of an undefeated warrior named Baiken whose weapons
were a sickle and a long chain with a steel ball at the end of it. Musashi
wanted to see these weapons in action, but Baiken refused: the only way he
could see them work, Baiken said, was by fighting a duel.
REFRESHING THE MIND When you and your opponent are engaged in
combat which is dragging on with no end in sight, it is crucial that you
should come up with a completely different technique. By refreshing
your mind and techniques as you continue to fight your opponent, you
will find an appropriate rhythm-timing with which to defeat him.
Whenever you and your opponent become stagnant, you must
immediately employ a different method of dealing with him in order to
overcome him.
